---
title: Seeing the Unseen
date: 2013-06-05
author: Quint Gregory
layout: post
---

*Cross-posted on [Nexus: The Michelle Smith Collaboratory Blog](http://michellesmithcollaboratory.umd.edu/blog/seeing-unseen)*

![collaboratory](http://michellesmithcollaboratory.umd.edu/sites/michellesmithcollaboratory.umd.edu/files/styles/newslist/public/Matt_with_visualization.jpg?itok=hgU1Fweh)

Data visualization (data viz among the human-computer interaction
community), which is making visible the relationships between sets of
data, abounds in our hyper-kinectic and hyper-connected world. From the
ubiquitous [word
clouds](http://www.niemanlab.org/2011/10/word-clouds-considered-harmful/)
(tag clouds) to the all-too familiar maps of the United States
[political
landscape](http://www.graphgraph.com/2012/11/maps-of-the-2012-presidential-election/)
(especially during elections!) to [real-time traffic condition
maps](http://www.gpsreview.net/painting-traffic/) accessible on our
smart phones, we might find it hard these days to get through a day
without one good visualization. The [really good data
visualization](http://www.cs.umd.edu/hcil/lifeflow/) draws the mind to
meaningful relationships and conclusions one might otherwise never have
discovered. A good data visualization also can take a known fact or
concept and amplify its significance, often in
[haunting](http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=YgiMBxaL19M),
[beautiful](http://imgur.com/gallery/P0Twl) and profound ways.

Data visualization has been an area of intense activity in universities
for maybe two decades, but particularly the last decade there has been
tremendous growth both in the scope and sophistication of projects of
inquiry and in the reputation such centers of inquiry have earned, such
as [MITH](http://mith.umd.edu/) here at UMD. You know you've arrived
when there are bi-annual or yearly globe-hopping conferences to attend!

So where does Art History fit in all of this? How does a field that
deals with the visual, with the created visible object, make use of data
visualization? As you might imagine, the earliest forays in data
visualization concentrated on bringing to the eye that which no longer
is visible or visitable, often with stunning results. This data
visualization is called modeling, but it is data visualization just the
same, the best of the models made after painstaking research and study
of relevant archaeological or archival materials. [The Rome Reborn
project](http://www.romereborn.virginia.edu/about-current.php), a joint
[IATH](http://www.iath.virginia.edu/) (UVa) and [Visualization
Portal](https://idre.ucla.edu/gis-visualization) (UCLA) venture, and
Lisa Snyder's ongoing reconstruction of the [The World's Columbian
Exposition in
1893](http://www.ust.ucla.edu/ustweb/Projects/columbian_expo.htm) in
Chicago at the Urban Simulation Team (UCLA) are two excellent examples.
Indeed, the Collaboratory's visualization space, with its large, curved
screen, privileges the viewing of such immersive models. Beyond that,
what is there in data visualization for Art History? Better asked, how
might Art History make use of the powerful tool of data visualization?

Over the past three years here in the Collaboratory we have focused alot
on creating maps and tours in Google Earth that could prove useful to
teaching in the classroom (and look for some exciting, interactive
developments with our extant maps sometime later this summer!). Matthew
Lincoln, one the past Spring's graduate assistants in the digital
humanities and working here in that capacity for the summer, saw
intriguing possibilities in those early maps and their awkward
interconnectivity, especially with specific placemarks, and set out to
do something a little different, that is to visualize a primary text,
[Albrecht Durer's diary account of his travels to the Netherlands in
1520-21](http://michellesmithcollaboratory.umd.edu/maps). An extremely
detailed accounting of the artist's travels, the diary offers art
historians a feast of data that when visualized can exist independent of
the sequential narrative in which they are found and thereby take on new
life and new meaning. One is not bound to the sequence of the diary
itself but can explore via discrete nodes of time or places on a map,
with the relevant pages from the diary or images of works mentioned
readily available for quick consumption. This interaction is made
possible by the fact that the primary text has been turned into a
relational database by careful coding of the text so that, for instance,
a placename is identified as something to be geolocated, and a work of
art can be tagged and associated with a jpeg file of it. That relational
database then can be translated into, in this case, a Google Earth
visualization. More importantly, it can be translated in different
directions, depending on the type of visualization one wishes. As well,
because Durer's text now is a base table of cells of data, it can be
merged with other databases, say of artists active around the time of
Durer's trip, rendering visible possible connections not mentioned in
the text.

As impressive as is this Spring project, Matt is not done. Currently he
is trying to access XML tables of artists biographies (think Getty's
ULAN) and integrate those into a data visualization of the movements of
Dutch and Flemish still life artists over the course of their careers,
an idea first conceived and tentatively mapped out in Google Earth by
another graduate student in the Department, Kristi Jamrisko. If you
happen to be at the [THATcamp Prime](http://chnm2013.thatcamp.org/)Â  at
George Mason University this Friday and Saturday, you'll undoubtedly get
a sneak peek and can help Matt think through the challenges of
visualizing data that is not always so precise (what does one do with
circa dates, after all?). Matt's work is worth keeping an eye on, as is
his excellent [blog](http://mlincoln.wordpress.com/).