---
layout: post
comments: true
title: "Marvelous Mechanical Bodies"
date: 2014-04-02 17:28
tags: 
- Art History
---

<aside>
<p>This paper was presented at the 2014 meeting of the Renaissance Society of
America in New York.</p>

<p>&quot;Marvelous Mechanical Bodies in Sixteenth-Century Joyous Entries In Antwerp and Vienna&quot; by <a href="http://matthewlincoln.net">Matthew D. Lincoln</a> is licensed under a <a href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/deed.en_US">Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 3.0 Unported License</a>.</p>
<p><a href="http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/deed.en_US"><img src="http://i.creativecommons.org/l/by-nc-nd/3.0/88x31.png" alt="Creative Commons License" /></a></p>
</aside>

Abstract
========

This paper explores the mechanized performance of fealty by marvelous mechanical bodies in early modern joyous entries in northern Europe. Colossal sculptures and paintings allegedly bowed to Philip II in 1549 and Duke François of Anjou in 1582 during their entries into Antwerp, and to Rudolf II in his 1577 entry into Vienna. I will investigate how these automated bodies meshed with the discourses of these spectacular entries. Contemporary theories of *meraviglia* suggest a body that conspicuously crossed the boundary between inert sculpture and animated being could still the audience into statuesque spectators, thus calling attention to the wondrousness of the machine’s manufacture as well as the wondrousness of the animating sovereign’s presence. By connecting these mechanical marvels to literary conventions of artificial bodies and automata in late sixteenth-century elite society, we can better understand why these fealty-performing bodies would have been considered ideal signals of courtly power.

<script async class="speakerdeck-embed" data-id="d98d70c084890131b8c766a463623da4" data-ratio="1.33333333333333" src="//speakerdeck.com/assets/embed.js"></script>

Introduction
============

**(SLIDE 2)** This is a page from the 1549 festival book published by
Cornelius Grapheus commemorating the joyous entry of the then-prince
Philip II into Antwerp.[^1] According to this book, Philip would have
encountered this colossal statue of the giant Druon Antigoon from
Antwerp folk legend. Philip had already passed by a great many other
triumphal displays staffed with allegorical figures celebrating the
exchange of oaths between the Flemish city and their soon-to-be
sovereign. Some of these decorative figures were painted on temporary
arches, others sculpted from plaster, and some even vividly embodied by
live men and women staged in *tableaux vivants*. Yet if Grapheus is to
be believed, something remarkable happened as Philip approached this
particular statue: the great colossus suddenly came to life, bowing its
head to the prince in seeming-reverence.[^2] Here, amidst a host of
living humans acting like statues, was a sculpture that surprisingly
acted like a living human!

This statue was hardly the first mechanical apparatus deployed during a
triumphal entry in the European Renaissance, and it would not be the
last. Though I only have time to offer a handful of examples today, I
hope to approach this core question: Why did sixteenth-century designers
find mechanical bodies an ideal way to communicate fealty to a
sovereign? The answer, I will argue, is twofold. Firstly, these automata
participated in a storied tradition of joyous entries with mechanical
artworks fashioned by no less a figure than Leonardo da Vinci. Secondly,
these mechanical bodies appealed to a decidedly courtly fascination with
liminal objects. Like prized artworks that blurred the border between
artistic media or between natural and artificial wonders, these automata
magnified their political messages by fostering wonder and delight at
their ambiguous identities.

Examples of 16th Century Automata
=================================

Druon Antigoon in Antwerp
-------------------------

**(SLIDE 3)** Philip II’s 1549 joyous entry into Antwerp came several
years before he would assume the throne of his father, Charles V. The
spectacle framed the exchange of vows of fealty between Philip and the
city of Antwerp. This peculiar tradition dated back to the original 1356
Inauguration Charter in which Antwerp pledged its faithful submission to
Johanna, Duchess of Brabant. She, in turn, promised that her rule would
be just and fair to the citizens of the city. From Cornelius Grapheus’
surviving festival book, we see that the decorations for Philip’s entry
almost two centuries later echoed this dual theme. The various archways
visualized Antwerp’s devotion to Philip and the bounties it could offer
the empire. They simultaneously invoked historical examples of honorable
and just sovereigns, establishing Philip’s responsibilities through past
precedents. **(SLIDE 4)** For example, one arch included life-size
statues of Philip’s namesakes such as Philip the Fair, Philip of
Macedon, Philip the Roman Emperor, and Saint Philip the Apostle. As
Stijn Bussels has demonstrated in his recent analysis of the 1549 entry,
the ceremony continuously invoked past precedents that endowed the
present-day performance of power relations with historical force.[^3]

**(SLIDE 5)** Druon Antigoon was no exception to this rhetorical
program. His pedestal bore an inscription explaining its place in the
broader symbolic program of this joyous entry. According to legend,
Antigoon had been a tyrannical giant who kept guard over the Scheldt
river, exacting tolls from passing ships. If a captain refused, the
giant would cut off his right hand. It was said that the Roman hero
Salvius Brabo appropriately vanquished the giant by severing Antigoon’s
own right hand. In his festival book Grapheus compared Philip to this
Roman hero. This is fine praise for the young prince, but it also
telegraphs his responsibilities to protect the Antwerp’s liberty.

**(SLIDE 6)** Antwerp, of course, would later come to revolt along with
the rest of the Netherlands against the emperor Philip, justifying their
rebellion due to Philip’s failure to live up to these responsibilities.
The Low Countries eventually fostered an alliance with the French in
1580, with William the Silent offering a governorship to François, the
Duke of Anjou and Alençon and brother to France’s King Henri III. When
François and his troops arrived in the Netherlands in 1582, the cities
of Bruges, Ghent, and Antwerp all welcomed him with joyous entries.[^4]

**(SLIDE 7)** A lavishly-illustrated festival book documents the
spectacles that Pieter Loyseleur de Villiers and the polymathic Hans
Vredeman de Vries planned for François. These festivities once again
featured a mechanical Druon Antigoon that moved in reaction to the
passing sovereign.[^5] **(SLIDE 8)** But the designers of this entry had
added some new functionality. Antigoon now held a standard in his left
hand. As the statue nodded to François, it simultaneously lowered the
Spanish flag and raised the French one, compounding the mechanical
expression of fealty to Antwerp’s new sovereign by performing the
rejection of the old one.[^6] This new version of Antigoon boldly
inverted its former politics, now comparing the rejected Philip to the
tyrannical giant and physically discarding Spanish colors for
French.[^7]

**(SLIDE 9)** An etching by Frans Hogenberg gives us a sense of the
scene in the Grote Markt that day. If any human operators were aiding
the statue in its motions, the artist has effaced their presence here.
**(SLIDE 10)** Note also how Hogenberg clearly emphasizes the moment of
interaction between François and the colossus, setting the mechanical
body in perfect profile against the passing entourage and showing
François turned to regard the statue. If the organizers sought to
capture the Duke’s attention, Hogenberg seems to think they succeeded.

**(SLIDE 11)** (As an aside, an Antigoon float with a turning head
occasionally shows up in modern-day parades in Antwerp. **(SLIDE
12-13)** Since the late 19th century he has also been complemented by a
fountain in the Grote Markt that wittily illustrates Silvius’ Brabo’s
amputation of the giant.)

Vienna 1577 – Emperor Rudolf II enters Vienna
---------------------------------------------

**(SLIDE 14)** A rather different form of automaton appeared in the
joyous entry of the Holy Roman Emperor Rudolf II into Vienna on July
15th, 1577. A report written by the imperial secretary Paulus Fabritius
describes the scene. Two decorated arches stood at the city gates: one
at the Danube Gate on the northeastern side of the city, and one on the
Bauernmarkt to the southwest on the opposite side of the river.[^8]
**(SLIDE 15)** In addition to a double-headed Roman eagle and a poetic
inscription praising Rudolf, the painted panels on the Danube gate bore
personifications of the imperial territories.[^9] **(SLIDE 16)**
According to Fabritius’ remarkable description, the festival designers
constructed the figure of Europe from superimposed, moveable panels
attached to the surface of the arch. They configured these panels in
such a way that Europe appeared to bend her head and knees in apparent
reverence as Rudolf passed by the arch.[^10] **(SLIDE 17)** On the
opposite side of this arch was another articulated, multi-panel painting
of Austria, dressed in red and white and carrying a lance and shield.
She, too, bowed to the emperor as he passed.[^11]

**(SLIDE 18)** Though Thomas DaCoasta Kaufmann published this account
quite some time ago, to my knowledge the peculiar motion of these
paintings has not drawn extended comment. Their overlap with the
mechanical bodies described in the Antwerp entries intrigued me. While
festival books give descriptive accounts of these moving artworks, they
don’t reconstruct for us the motivation for deploying such mechanical
bodies. What I find most fascinating is the unique position of these
mechanical bodies in relation to their surrounding political spectacles.
What does it mean that these automata, in effect, performed their
stillness in the context of so many other static decorations, only
becoming animate in the presence of the sovereign? To understand the
reception of these works, we need to plot their relationships to the
literary conventions and historic legends of lifelike artworks. Did the
legendary history of automata prompt the creative decisions of these
spectacles’ designers? How did the rhetoric of automata inform the
celebrated rulers’ reception of these moving artworks? How did rest of
the joyous entry position and condition its celebrants to view these
moving bodies?

Historic Legends of Mechanical Marvels
======================================

The history of technology is peppered with examples of automata that the
learned viewers in Antwerp and Vienna may have recalled when confronted
with mechanical giants and moving paintings. Accounts include the
apocryphal and mythical, such as Hephaestus moving brass tripods,
Daedalus’ miraculous dancing sculptures, and Albertus Magnus’ brazen
talking head.[^12] Crucially, several of these legendary or
quasi-mythical accounts were connected to royal pageants. **(SLIDE 19)**
In 1571 Petrus Ramus described, in what is certainly an apocryphal
account, a mechanical fly designed by the mathematician Regiomontanus
that could fly around a room of its own accord and return to its owner’s
hand, to the great wonder of onlookers. Ramus also mentioned a
mechanical eagle that Regiomontanus constructed, which could fly out
from Nuremberg to meet an approaching dignitary and escort them into the
city.[^13]

**(SLIDE 20)** Even more famed was Leonardo da Vinci’s legendary lion, a
creation that seems to have transcended historical constraints. As Jill
Burke has remarked, once one looks into the Leonardo literature,
“robotic lions start appearing everywhere.”[^14] Accounts of the joyous
entries of Louis XII into Milan in July of 1509 and the entry of
François I into Lyons in 1515 both describe a captivating performance by
a Leonardo device. In both these accounts, a mechanical lion is said to
marvelously move of its own accord before stopping, bowing before the
monarch, and then opening its chest to present a bouquet of lilies to
the monarch. Although the historicity of this early sixteenth-century
marvel is uncertain, the conventional imagery was clearly enduring.
Fromt he year 1600, Michelangelo Buonarotti the Younger reported that
the wedding celebration of Marie de’ Medici include a robotic lion done
in the style of Leonardo’s machine. The pairing of lion and lilies has
been interpreted in as a pointed political statement on the fall of
Venice (symbolized by the lion) with the arrival of the French king
(symbolized by the lilies). Others find it to be a broader comment on
the power of a king to subdue animalistic violence to his peaceful
rule.[^15] As with many Leonardo machines, there is little consensus
over which extant designs may be linked to the legend of the mechanical
lion. Some scholars have argued this drawing from the *Codex Atlanticus*
may depict the mechanical engine for just such a programmable
automaton.[^16] There have also been even more imaginative
reconstructions demonstrating the flower mechanism.

**(SLIDE 21)** Of course whether or not any of these earlier automata
actually existed is, for our purposes, beyond the point. That their
stories abounded, persisting even into the seventeenth century, suggests
their purchase on the early modern courtly mind. And between
Regiomontanus’ eagle and Leonardo’s lion, we find these mechanical
bodies deployed for political purposes. It is likely that the moving
statues and paintings of the Antwerp and Vienna entries may have
reminded their learned viewers of these precedents.

Courtly Wonders of Art and Nature
=================================

I do not want to suggest, however, that these mechanical bodies could
only be read in an historical sense. We cannot ignore their visual,
affective power. **(SLIDE 22)** Recall that, on their path to Antwerp’s
Grote Markt, both Philip and François had passed a dozen or more
*tableaux vivants* in which humans imitated life-sized statues. Here we
see an example from Philip’s 1549 entry, with living actors fit into a
proscenium stage. These *tableaux vivants* must have created an
interesting effect when mixed in with the many papier mâché figures
scattered along the parade route. Each new human-sized figure had the
potential to be either an artificial statue, or a disguised actor who
would suddenly break into motion on cue. Antigoon’s colossal proportions
likely magnified this surprise. Surely such a colossus could not be a
human actor playing the role of a sculpture! And yet come to life it
did. **(SLIDE 23)** A similar effect must have occurred in Rudolf’s
Vienna entry as the articulated paintings of Europe and Austria shifted
into motion Spectators, including Rudolf himself, would presumably have
been suspecting motion even less from a painting than from a statue.
This revelatory moment must have engendered a sense of wonder in the
spectator: wonder in their initial confusion over the status of the
object, then wonder and admiration of the ingenious craft that created
such a display. Through these devices, organizers could generate an
affective response even from spectators who did not understand the
subtle and layered iconography aimed at the processing monarchs and
their learned retinues.[^17]

**(SLIDE 24)** In his later treatise on metaphor and conceit, *The
Telescope of Aristotle*, Emanuele Tesauro described the reaction of
audiences to the mechanical marvels of Gerolamo Cardano, a Italian
mathematician who is said to have constructed walking automatons in the
mid-sixteenth century. Tesauro wrote that there was, “so much stupor on
the part of the onlookers that they appeared to be statues; and the
[moving] statues appeared to be onlookers.”[^18] Although composed well
after the spectacles under consideration, I mention Tesauro’s witty turn
of phrase because it encapsulates why automata so preoccupied early
modern thought. Note that he choose to convey the wonder engendered by
the dancing statues through a pun on confused identities: the automata
were so marvelous, their viewers so stupefied, that they appeared to
swap roles. Tesauro’s reversal of subject and object makes for clever
rhetoric, but it also points to an encompassing interest in this period
in polysemous objects. (And here I am indebted to the work of Lorrane
Datson and Katherine Park.) These automata have similarly unfixed
identities: between static artwork and a human *tableau vivant*; between
a work of fine art and a feat of mechanical engineering; between the
object of a royal gaze, and a subject that itself appears to watch the
royals.

As Louis Marin has pointed out, role-switching is endemic to these kinds
of theatrical processions, with an individual subject alternately, or
even simultaneously, inhabiting the role of actor and spectator at
different points in the spectacle.[^19] I suggest that the ambiguous
nature of these mechanical bodies tapped into a vein of court culture
familiar to many of us — that fascination with ambiguous or liminal
objects. **(SLIDE 25)** Early modern courtly collectors developing their
own *kunst-* and *wunderkammern* in the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries, such as Rudolf II, delighted in ambiguous artworks that
transcended boundaries of all kind.[^20] This sometimes meant artistic
boundaries of medium, as in this work by Hendrick Goltzius in which he
simulated the swelling and tapering lines of engraving with ink and oil
paint on canvas.[^21] **(SLIDE 26)** Also fascinating was the visual
boundary between illusion and reality, something Joris Hoefnagel
explored in this illuminated manuscript from the Rudolfine
collections.[^22] **(SLIDE 27)** And, of course, there was the
ever-fruitful conceptual boundary between *artificialia* and
*naturalia*. Collectors also prized art that imitated or played on
effects of natural materials, such as this landscape done in *pietre
dure* — or, as I like to think of it, a landscape made *of* the
landscape.[^23]

**(SLIDE 28)** From these examples, it seems the most exciting pieces of
a Renaissance *kunstkammer* were that class of things that the
sixteenth-century Florentine Vincenzo Borghini asserted, “do not belong
entirely to nature or entirely to art, but rather are shared by both.”
Automata were considered some of the highest accomplishments of this
type of artifice, because although they were creations of man, they also
possessed an internal principle of motion, what Aristotle had called,
“the primary mark of that which is natural”.[^24] And so it should not
surprise us to find automatons not only in royal processions, but royal
collections, too. **(SLIDE 29)** Take this clockwork centerpiece from
the Vienna Kunsthistorisches museum, whose robotic crew moved and played
music as the ship rolled along the banquet table, even firing its
cannons.[^25] **(SLIDE 30)** One listing in a seventeenth-century
inventory of Rudolf’s *kunstkammer* seems particularly relevant for us
today. The entry describes a most peculiar landscape painting on metal
that depicted a scene of peasants busily harvesting crops, their bodies
apparently rocking back and forth by the action of some invisible
machinery.[^26] No such sixteenth-century clockwork painting survives
today, but such an object may have looked like this eighteenth-century
creation.[^27] **(SLIDE 31)** In these, the painted scene on the recto
of the metal panel has slots cut into it, through which flat painted
cutouts attached in a chain can be made to move. Indeed, it seems this
obscure line from the Rudolfine collections may connect back to his
entry into Vienna in 1577, where genuflecting paintings on a grand scale
may have inspired him to seek out an analogue for the intimate environs
of his *kunstkammer*.

**(SLIDE 32)** And so I close hopefully a bit closer to understanding
the place of these bizarre and wondrous mechanical bodies in the
choreographed environment of the sixteenth-century joyous entry. By
constructing these automata, the organizers certainly amplified the
iconographic programs of fealty already encoded in their archways and
inscriptions. But more than this, they invoked legends of other
mechanical works in earlier joyous entires, further aligning their
ceremonies with historic precedents. The machines in the Antwerp and
Vienna entries engaged the trope of the lifelike artwork by
conspicuously crossing the boundary between inert sculpture and animated
being. Philip, François, and Rudolf must have admired them both for
their mechanical prowess, as well as for their intriguing dual nature:
at once lifelike and artificial. This nature called attention to the
wondrousness of the machine’s manufacture, but also to the wondrousness
of very presence the animating sovereign.

References
==========

Introduction
============

**(SLIDE 2)** This is a page from teh 1549 festival book published by
Cornelius Grapheus commemorating the joyous entry of the then-prince
Philip II into Antwerp.[^28] According to this book, Philip would have
encountered this colossal statue of the giant Druon Antigoon from
Antwerp folk legend. Philip had already passed by a great many other
triumphal displays staffed with allegorical figures celebrating the
exchange of oaths between the Flemish city and their soon-to-be
sovereign. Some of these decorative figures were painted on temporary
arches, others sculpted from plaster, and some even vividly embodied by
live men and women staged in *tableaux vivants*. Yet if Grapheus is to
be believed, something remarkable happened as Philip approached this
particular statue: the great colossus suddenly came to life, bowing its
head to the prince in seeming-reverence.[^29] Here, amidst a host of
living humans acting like statues, was a sculpture that surprisingly
acted like a living human!

This statue was hardly the first mechanical apparatus deployed during a
triumphal entry in the European Renaissance, and it would not be the
last. Though I only have time to offer a handful of examples today, I
hope to approach this core question: Why did sixteenth-century designers
find mechanical bodies an ideal way to communicate fealty to a
sovereign? The answer, I will argue, is twofold. Firstly, these automata
participated in a storied tradition of joyous entries with mechanical
artworks fashioned by no less a figure than Leonardo da Vinci. Secondly,
these mechanical bodies appealed to a decidedly courtly fascination with
liminal objects. Like prized artworks that blurred the border between
artistic media or between natural and artificial wonders, these automata
magnified their political messages by fostering wonder and delight at
their ambiguous identities.

Examples of 16th Century Automata
=================================

Druon Antigoon in Antwerp
-------------------------

**(SLIDE 3)** Philip II’s 1549 joyous entry into Antwerp came several
years before he would assume the throne of his father, Charles V. The
spectacle framed the exchange of vows of fealty between Philip and the
city of Antwerp. This peculiar tradition dated back to the original 1356
Inauguration Charter in which Antwerp pledged its faithful submission to
Johanna, Duchess of Brabant. She, in turn, promised that her rule would
be just and fair to the citizens of the city. From Cornelius Grapheus’
surviving festival book, we see that the decorations for Philip’s entry
almost two centuries later echoed this dual theme. The various archways
visualized Antwerp’s devotion to Philip and the bounties it could offer
the empire. They simultaneously invoked historical examples of honorable
and just sovereigns, establishing Philip’s responsibilities through past
precedents. **(SLIDE 4)** For example, one arch included life-size
statues of Philip’s namesakes such as Philip the Fair, Philip of
Macedon, Philip the Roman Emperor, and Saint Philip the Apostle. As
Stijn Bussels has demonstrated in his recent analysis of the 1549 entry,
the ceremony continuously invoked past precedents that endowed the
present-day performance of power relations with historical force.[^30]

**(SLIDE 5)** Druon Antigoon was no exception to this rhetorical
program. His pedestal bore an inscription explaining its place in the
broader symbolic program of this joyous entry. According to legend,
Antigoon had been a tyrannical giant who kept guard over the Scheldt
river, exacting tolls from passing ships. If a captain refused, the
giant would cut off his right hand. It was said that the Roman hero
Salvius Brabo appropriately vanquished the giant by severing Antigoon’s
own right hand. In his festival book Grapheus compared Philip to this
Roman hero. This is fine praise for the young prince, but it also
telegraphs his responsibilities to protect the Antwerp’s liberty.

**(SLIDE 6)** Antwerp, of course, would later come to revolt along with
the rest of the Netherlands against the emperor Philip, justifying their
rebellion due to Philip’s failure to live up to these responsibilities.
The Low Countries eventually fostered an alliance with the French in
1580, with William the Silent offering a governorship to François, the
Duke of Anjou and Alençon and brother to France’s King Henri III. When
François and his troops arrived in the Netherlands in 1582, the cities
of Bruges, Ghent, and Antwerp all welcomed him with joyous entries.[^31]

**(SLIDE 7)** A lavishly-illustrated festival book documents the
spectacles that Pieter Loyseleur de Villiers and the polymathic Hans
Vredeman de Vries planned for François. These festivities once again
featured a mechanical Druon Antigoon that moved in reaction to the
passing sovereign.[^32] **(SLIDE 8)** But the designers of this entry
had added some new functionality. Antigoon now held a standard in his
left hand. As the statue nodded to François, it simultaneously lowered
the Spanish flag and raised the French one, compounding the mechanical
expression of fealty to Antwerp’s new sovereign by performing the
rejection of the old one.[^33] This new version of Antigoon boldly
inverted its former politics, now comparing the rejected Philip to the
tyrannical giant and physically discarding Spanish colors for
French.[^34]

**(SLIDE 9)** An etching by Frans Hogenberg gives us a sense of the
scene in the Grote Markt that day. If any human operators were aiding
the statue in its motions, the artist has effaced their presence here.
**(SLIDE 10)** Note also how Hogenberg clearly emphasizes the moment of
interaction between François and the colossus, setting the mechanical
body in perfect profile against the passing entourage and showing
François turned to regard the statue. If the organizers sought to
capture the Duke’s attention, Hogenberg seems to think they succeeded.

**(SLIDE 11)** (As an aside, an Antigoon float with a turning head
occasionally shows up in modern-day parades in Antwerp. **(SLIDE
12-13)** Since the late 19th century he has also been complemented by a
fountain in the Grote Markt that wittily illustrates Silvius’ Brabo’s
amputation of the giant.)

Vienna 1577 – Emperor Rudolf II enters Vienna
---------------------------------------------

**(SLIDE 14)** A rather different form of automaton appeared in the
joyous entry of the Holy Roman Emperor Rudolf II into Vienna on July
15th, 1577. A report written by the imperial secretary Paulus Fabritius
describes the scene. Two decorated arches stood at the city gates: one
at the Danube Gate on the northeastern side of the city, and one on the
Bauernmarkt to the southwest on the opposite side of the river.[^35]
**(SLIDE 15)** In addition to a double-headed Roman eagle and a poetic
inscription praising Rudolf, the painted panels on the Danube gate bore
personifications of the imperial territories.[^36] **(SLIDE 16)**
According to Fabritius’ remarkable description, the festival designers
constructed the figure of Europe from superimposed, moveable panels
attached to the surface of the arch. They configured these panels in
such a way that Europe appeared to bend her head and knees in apparent
reverence as Rudolf passed by the arch.[^37] **(SLIDE 17)** On the
opposite side of this arch was another articulated, multi-panel painting
of Austria, dressed in red and white and carrying a lance and shield.
She, too, bowed to the emperor as he passed.[^38]

**(SLIDE 18)** Though Thomas DaCoasta Kaufmann published this account
quite some time ago, to my knowledge the peculiar motion of these
paintings has not drawn extended comment. Their overlap with the
mechanical bodies described in the Antwerp entries intrigued me. While
festival books give descriptive accounts of these moving artworks, they
don’t reconstruct for us the motivation for deploying such mechanical
bodies. What I find most fascinating is the unique position of these
mechanical bodies in relation to their surrounding political spectacles.
What does it mean that these automata, in effect, performed their
stillness in the context of so many other static decorations, only
becoming animate in the presence of the sovereign? To understand the
reception of these works, we need to plot their relationships to the
literary conventions and historic legends of lifelike artworks. Did the
legendary history of automata prompt the creative decisions of these
spectacles’ designers? How did the rhetoric of automata inform the
celebrated rulers’ reception of these moving artworks? How did rest of
the joyous entry position and condition its celebrants to view these
moving bodies?

Historic Legends of Mechanical Marvels
======================================

The history of technology is peppered with examples of automata that the
learned viewers in Antwerp and Vienna may have recalled when confronted
with mechanical giants and moving paintings. Accounts include the
apocryphal and mythical, such as Hephaestus moving brass tripods,
Daedalus’ miraculous dancing sculptures, and Albertus Magnus’ brazen
talking head.[^39] Crucially, several of these legendary or
quasi-mythical accounts were connected to royal pageants. **(SLIDE 19)**
In 1571 Petrus Ramus described, in what is certainly an apocryphal
account, a mechanical fly designed by the mathematician Regiomontanus
that could fly around a room of its own accord and return to its owner’s
hand, to the great wonder of onlookers. Ramus also mentioned a
mechanical eagle that Regiomontanus constructed, which could fly out
from Nuremberg to meet an approaching dignitary and escort them into the
city.[^40]

**(SLIDE 20)** Even more famed was Leonardo da Vinci’s legendary lion, a
creation that seems to have transcended historical constraints. As Jill
Burke has remarked, once one looks into the Leonardo literature,
“robotic lions start appearing everywhere.”[^41] Accounts of the joyous
entries of Louis XII into Milan in July of 1509 and the entry of
François I into Lyons in 1515 both describe a captivating performance by
a Leonardo device. In both these accounts, a mechanical lion is said to
marvelously move of its own accord before stopping, bowing before the
monarch, and then opening its chest to present a bouquet of lilies to
the monarch. Although the historicity of this early sixteenth-century
marvel is uncertain, the conventional imagery was clearly enduring.
Fromt he year 1600, Michelangelo Buonarotti the Younger reported that
the wedding celebration of Marie de’ Medici include a robotic lion done
in the style of Leonardo’s machine. The pairing of lion and lilies has
been interpreted in as a pointed political statement on the fall of
Venice (symbolized by the lion) with the arrival of the French king
(symbolized by the lilies). Others find it to be a broader comment on
the power of a king to subdue animalistic violence to his peaceful
rule.[^42] As with many Leonardo machines, there is little consensus
over which extant designs may be linked to the legend of the mechanical
lion. Some scholars have argued this drawing from the *Codex Atlanticus*
may depict the mechanical engine for just such a programmable
automaton.[^43] There have also been even more imaginative
reconstructions demonstrating the flower mechanism.

**(SLIDE 21)** Of course whether or not any of these earlier automata
actually existed is, for our purposes, beyond the point. That their
stories abounded, persisting even into the seventeenth century, suggests
their purchase on the early modern courtly mind. And between
Regiomontanus’ eagle and Leonardo’s lion, we find these mechanical
bodies deployed for political purposes. It is likely that the moving
statues and paintings of the Antwerp and Vienna entries may have
reminded their learned viewers of these precedents.

Courtly Wonders of Art and Nature
=================================

I do not want to suggest, however, that these mechanical bodies could
only be read in an historical sense. We cannot ignore their visual,
affective power. **(SLIDE 22)** Recall that, on their path to Antwerp’s
Grote Markt, both Philip and François had passed a dozen or more
*tableaux vivants* in which humans imitated life-sized statues. Here we
see an example from Philip’s 1549 entry, with living actors fit into a
proscenium stage. These *tableaux vivants* must have created an
interesting effect when mixed in with the many papier mâché figures
scattered along the parade route. Each new human-sized figure had the
potential to be either an artificial statue, or a disguised actor who
would suddenly break into motion on cue. Antigoon’s colossal proportions
likely magnified this surprise. Surely such a colossus could not be a
human actor playing the role of a sculpture! And yet come to life it
did. **(SLIDE 23)** A similar effect must have occurred in Rudolf’s
Vienna entry as the articulated paintings of Europe and Austria shifted
into motion Spectators, including Rudolf himself, would presumably have
been suspecting motion even less from a painting than from a statue.
This revelatory moment must have engendered a sense of wonder in the
spectator: wonder in their initial confusion over the status of the
object, then wonder and admiration of the ingenious craft that created
such a display. Through these devices, organizers could generate an
affective response even from spectators who did not understand the
subtle and layered iconography aimed at the processing monarchs and
their learned retinues.[^44]

**(SLIDE 24)** In his later treatise on metaphor and conceit, *The
Telescope of Aristotle*, Emanuele Tesauro described the reaction of
audiences to the mechanical marvels of Gerolamo Cardano, a Italian
mathematician who is said to have constructed walking automatons in the
mid-sixteenth century. Tesauro wrote that there was, “so much stupor on
the part of the onlookers that they appeared to be statues; and the
[moving] statues appeared to be onlookers.”[^45] Although composed well
after the spectacles under consideration, I mention Tesauro’s witty turn
of phrase because it encapsulates why automata so preoccupied early
modern thought. Note that he choose to convey the wonder engendered by
the dancing statues through a pun on confused identities: the automata
were so marvelous, their viewers so stupefied, that they appeared to
swap roles. Tesauro’s reversal of subject and object makes for clever
rhetoric, but it also points to an encompassing interest in this period
in polysemous objects. (And here I am indebted to the work of Lorrane
Datson and Katherine Park.) These automata have similarly unfixed
identities: between static artwork and a human *tableau vivant*; between
a work of fine art and a feat of mechanical engineering; between the
object of a royal gaze, and a subject that itself appears to watch the
royals.

As Louis Marin has pointed out, role-switching is endemic to these kinds
of theatrical processions, with an individual subject alternately, or
even simultaneously, inhabiting the role of actor and spectator at
different points in the spectacle.[^46] I suggest that the ambiguous
nature of these mechanical bodies tapped into a vein of court culture
familiar to many of us — that fascination with ambiguous or liminal
objects. **(SLIDE 25)** Early modern courtly collectors developing their
own *kunst-* and *wunderkammern* in the sixteenth and seventeenth
centuries, such as Rudolf II, delighted in ambiguous artworks that
transcended boundaries of all kind.[^47] This sometimes meant artistic
boundaries of medium, as in this work by Hendrick Goltzius in which he
simulated the swelling and tapering lines of engraving with ink and oil
paint on canvas.[^48] **(SLIDE 26)** Also fascinating was the visual
boundary between illusion and reality, something Joris Hoefnagel
explored in this illuminated manuscript from the Rudolfine
collections.[^49] **(SLIDE 27)** And, of course, there was the
ever-fruitful conceptual boundary between *artificialia* and
*naturalia*. Collectors also prized art that imitated or played on
effects of natural materials, such as this landscape done in *pietre
dure* — or, as I like to think of it, a landscape made *of* the
landscape.[^50]

**(SLIDE 28)** From these examples, it seems the most exciting pieces of
a Renaissance *kunstkammer* were that class of things that the
sixteenth-century Florentine Vincenzo Borghini asserted, “do not belong
entirely to nature or entirely to art, but rather are shared by both.”
Automata were considered some of the highest accomplishments of this
type of artifice, because although they were creations of man, they also
possessed an internal principle of motion, what Aristotle had called,
“the primary mark of that which is natural”.[^51] And so it should not
surprise us to find automatons not only in royal processions, but royal
collections, too. **(SLIDE 29)** Take this clockwork centerpiece from
the Vienna Kunsthistorisches museum, whose robotic crew moved and played
music as the ship rolled along the banquet table, even firing its
cannons.[^52] **(SLIDE 30)** One listing in a seventeenth-century
inventory of Rudolf’s *kunstkammer* seems particularly relevant for us
today. The entry describes a most peculiar landscape painting on metal
that depicted a scene of peasants busily harvesting crops, their bodies
apparently rocking back and forth by the action of some invisible
machinery.[^53] No such sixteenth-century clockwork painting survives
today, but such an object may have looked like this eighteenth-century
creation.[^54] **(SLIDE 31)** In these, the painted scene on the recto
of the metal panel has slots cut into it, through which flat painted
cutouts attached in a chain can be made to move. Indeed, it seems this
obscure line from the Rudolfine collections may connect back to his
entry into Vienna in 1577, where genuflecting paintings on a grand scale
may have inspired him to seek out an analogue for the intimate environs
of his *kunstkammer*.

**(SLIDE 32)** And so I close hopefully a bit closer to understanding
the place of these bizarre and wondrous mechanical bodies in the
choreographed environment of the sixteenth-century joyous entry. By
constructing these automata, the organizers certainly amplified the
iconographic programs of fealty already encoded in their archways and
inscriptions. But more than this, they invoked legends of other
mechanical works in earlier joyous entires, further aligning their
ceremonies with historic precedents. The machines in the Antwerp and
Vienna entries engaged the trope of the lifelike artwork by
conspicuously crossing the boundary between inert sculpture and animated
being. Philip, François, and Rudolf must have admired them both for
their mechanical prowess, as well as for their intriguing dual nature:
at once lifelike and artificial. This nature called attention to the
wondrousness of the machine’s manufacture, but also to the wondrousness
of very presence the animating sovereign.

References
==========

Bauer, Rotraud, and Herbert Haupt. “Das Kunstkammerinventar Kaiser
Rudolphs II: 1607-1611.” *Jahrbuch Der Kunsthistorischen Sammlungen in
Wien* 72 (1976): 1–191.

Bedini, Silvio A. “The Role of Automata in the History of Technology.”
*Technology and Culture* 5, no. 1 (1964): 24–42.
doi:[10.2307/3101120](http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/3101120).

Bredekamp, Horst. *The Lure of Antiquity and the Cult of the Machine:
The Kunstkammer and the Evolution of Nature, Art, and Technology*.
Translated by Allison Brown. Princeton: M. Wiener Publishers, 1995.

Bruaene, Anne-Laure van. “Spectacle and Spin for a Spurned Prince: Civic
Strategies in the Entry Ceremonies of the Duke of Anjou in Antwerp,
Bruges and Ghent (1582).” *Journal of Early Modern History* 11, no. 4
(September 2007): 263–84.
doi:[10.1163/157006507782263308](http://dx.doi.org/10.1163/157006507782263308).

Burke, Jill. “Meaning and Crisis in the Early Sixteenth Century:
Interpreting Leonardo’s Lion.” *Oxford Art Journal* 29, no. 1 (March
2006): 77–91.
doi:[10.1093/oxartj/kci048](http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/oxartj/kci048).

Bussels, Stijn. *Spectacle, Rhetoric and Power: The Triumphal Entry of
Prince Philip of Spain into Antwerp*. Ludus 11. Amsterdam; New York:
Rodopi, 2012.

Chapuis, Alfred, and Edmond Droz. *Automata: A Historical and
Technological Study*. Translated by Alec Reid. Neuchâtel: Éditions du
Griffon, 1958.

Daston, Lorraine, and Katherine Park. *Wonders and the Order of Nature:
1150-1750*. New York: Zone Books, 1998.

Findlen, Paula. “Cabinets, Collecting and Natural Philosophy.” In
*Rudolf Ii and Prague: The Court and the City*, edited by Eliska
Fucíková, 209–19. Prague: Prague Castle Administration, 1997.

Grapheus, Cornelius, and Julius Scaliger. *La Tresadmirable,
Tresmagnificque, [Et] Triumphante Entree, Du Treshault [Et] Trespuissant
Prince Philipes, Prince d’Espaignes, Filz de Lempereur Charles Ve,
Ensemble La Vraye Description Des Spectacles, Theatres, Archz
Triumphaulx [Et]C. Lesquelz Ont Este Faictz [Et] Bastis a Sa Tresdesiree
Reception En La Tresrenommee Florissante Ville d’Anuers. Anno 1549.*
Antwerp: Pieter Cocke van Aelst, 1550.

Hanafi, Zakiya. *The Monster in the Machine: Magic, Medicine, and the
Marvelous in the Time of the Scientific Revolution*. Durham: Duke
University Press, 2000.

Hendrix, Marjorie Lee, and Thea Vignau-Wilberg. *“Mira Calligraphiae
Monumenta”: a Sixteenth-Century Calligraphic Manuscript Inscribed by
Georg Bocskay and Illuminated by Joris Hoefnagel*. Malibu: J. Paul Getty
Museum, 1992.

*Regiomontanus: On Triangles*. Translated by Barnabas Hughes. Madison:
University of Wisconsin Press, 1967.

Kang, Minsoo. “Wonders of Mathematical Magic: Lists of Automata in the
Transition from Magic to Science, 1533-1662.” *Comitatus* 33 (2002):
113–39.

Kaufmann, Thomas <span>DaCosta</span>. *The Mastery of Nature: Aspects
of Art, Science, and Humanism in the Renaissance*. Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1993.

Koeppe, Wolfram. *Art of the Royal Court: Treasures in Pietre Dure from
the Palaces of Europe*. New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art, 2008.

Marin, Louis. “Notes on a Semiotic Approach to Parade, Cortege, and
Procession.” In *Time Out of Time: Essays on the Festival*, edited by
Alessandro Falassi, 220–28. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press,
1987.

Marr, Alexander. “Understanding Automata in the Late Renaissance.” *Le
Journal de La Renaissance* 2, no. 1 (2004): 205–22.
doi:[10.1484/J.JR.2.300368](http://dx.doi.org/10.1484/J.JR.2.300368).

Nichols, Lawrence W. “The”Pen Works" of Hendrick Goltzius.”
*Philadelphia Museum of Art Bulletin* 88, no. 373 (1992): 4–56.

Rosheim, Mark Elling. *Leonardo’s Lost Robots*. Berlin: Springer, 2006.

Tesauro, Emanuele. *Il Cannocchiale Aristotelico*. Venice: Steffano
Curti, 1678.

Villiers, Pieter Loyseleur de, and Hans Vredeman de Vries. *La Ioyeuse
[Et] Magnifique Entrée de Monseigneur Francoys, Fils de France, Et Frere
Unicque Du Roy, Par La Grace de Dieu, Duc de Brabant, d’Anjou, Alencon,
Berri, [Et]C. En Sa Tres-Renomée Ville d’Anvers.* Antwerp: Plantin,
1582.

Zinner, Ernst. *Regiomontanus: His Life and Work*. Translated by Ezra
Brown. Studies in the History and Philosophy of Mathematics 1.
Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Publishing Company, 1990.

Bauer, Rotraud, and Herbert Haupt. “Das Kunstkammerinventar Kaiser
Rudolphs II: 1607-1611.” *Jahrbuch Der Kunsthistorischen Sammlungen in
Wien* 72 (1976): 1–191.

Bedini, Silvio A. “The Role of Automata in the History of Technology.”
*Technology and Culture* 5, no. 1 (1964): 24–42.
doi:[10.2307/3101120](http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/3101120).

Bredekamp, Horst. *The Lure of Antiquity and the Cult of the Machine:
The Kunstkammer and the Evolution of Nature, Art, and Technology*.
Translated by Allison Brown. Princeton: M. Wiener Publishers, 1995.

Bruaene, Anne-Laure van. “Spectacle and Spin for a Spurned Prince: Civic
Strategies in the Entry Ceremonies of the Duke of Anjou in Antwerp,
Bruges and Ghent (1582).” *Journal of Early Modern History* 11, no. 4
(September 2007): 263–84.
doi:[10.1163/157006507782263308](http://dx.doi.org/10.1163/157006507782263308).

Burke, Jill. “Meaning and Crisis in the Early Sixteenth Century:
Interpreting Leonardo’s Lion.” *Oxford Art Journal* 29, no. 1 (March
2006): 77–91.
doi:[10.1093/oxartj/kci048](http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/oxartj/kci048).

Bussels, Stijn. *Spectacle, Rhetoric and Power: The Triumphal Entry of
Prince Philip of Spain into Antwerp*. Ludus 11. Amsterdam; New York:
Rodopi, 2012.

Chapuis, Alfred, and Edmond Droz. *Automata: A Historical and
Technological Study*. Translated by Alec Reid. Neuchâtel: Éditions du
Griffon, 1958.

Daston, Lorraine, and Katherine Park. *Wonders and the Order of Nature:
1150-1750*. New York: Zone Books, 1998.

Findlen, Paula. “Cabinets, Collecting and Natural Philosophy.” In
*Rudolf Ii and Prague: The Court and the City*, edited by Eliska
Fucíková, 209–19. Prague: Prague Castle Administration, 1997.

Grapheus, Cornelius, and Julius Scaliger. *La Tresadmirable,
Tresmagnificque, [Et] Triumphante Entree, Du Treshault [Et] Trespuissant
Prince Philipes, Prince d’Espaignes, Filz de Lempereur Charles Ve,
Ensemble La Vraye Description Des Spectacles, Theatres, Archz
Triumphaulx [Et]C. Lesquelz Ont Este Faictz [Et] Bastis a Sa Tresdesiree
Reception En La Tresrenommee Florissante Ville d’Anuers. Anno 1549.*
Antwerp: Pieter Cocke van Aelst, 1550.

Hanafi, Zakiya. *The Monster in the Machine: Magic, Medicine, and the
Marvelous in the Time of the Scientific Revolution*. Durham: Duke
University Press, 2000.

Hendrix, Marjorie Lee, and Thea Vignau-Wilberg. *"Mira Calligraphiae
Monumenta": a Sixteenth-Century Calligraphic Manuscript Inscribed by
Georg Bocskay and Illuminated by Joris Hoefnagel*. Malibu: J. Paul Getty
Museum, 1992.

*Regiomontanus: On Triangles*. Translated by Barnabas Hughes. Madison:
University of Wisconsin Press, 1967.

Kang, Minsoo. “Wonders of Mathematical Magic: Lists of Automata in the
Transition from Magic to Science, 1533-1662.” *Comitatus* 33 (2002):
113–39.

Kaufmann, Thomas <span>DaCosta</span>. *The Mastery of Nature: Aspects
of Art, Science, and Humanism in the Renaissance*. Princeton: Princeton
University Press, 1993.

Koeppe, Wolfram. *Art of the Royal Court: Treasures in Pietre Dure from
the Palaces of Europe*. New York: Metropolitan Museum of Art, 2008.

Marin, Louis. “Notes on a Semiotic Approach to Parade, Cortege, and
Procession.” In *Time Out of Time: Essays on the Festival*, edited by
Alessandro Falassi, 220–28. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press,
1987.

Marr, Alexander. “Understanding Automata in the Late Renaissance.” *Le
Journal de La Renaissance* 2, no. 1 (2004): 205–22.
doi:[10.1484/J.JR.2.300368](http://dx.doi.org/10.1484/J.JR.2.300368).

Nichols, Lawrence W. “The "Pen Works" of Hendrick Goltzius.”
*Philadelphia Museum of Art Bulletin* 88, no. 373 (1992): 4–56.

Rosheim, Mark Elling. *Leonardo’s Lost Robots*. Berlin: Springer, 2006.

Tesauro, Emanuele. *Il Cannocchiale Aristotelico*. Venice: Steffano
Curti, 1678.

Villiers, Pieter Loyseleur de, and Hans Vredeman de Vries. *La Ioyeuse
[Et] Magnifique Entrée de Monseigneur Francoys, Fils de France, Et Frere
Unicque Du Roy, Par La Grace de Dieu, Duc de Brabant, d’Anjou, Alencon,
Berri, [Et]C. En Sa Tres-Renomée Ville d’Anvers.* Antwerp: Plantin,
1582.

Zinner, Ernst. *Regiomontanus: His Life and Work*. Translated by Ezra
Brown. Studies in the History and Philosophy of Mathematics 1.
Amsterdam: Elsevier Science Publishing Company, 1990.

[^1]: This paper was presented at the 2014 meeting of the Renaissance
    Society of America in New York. It is based on a spring 2013
    graduate seminar led by Anthony Colantuono, whose comments were
    invaluable. I am thankful for the support of the Smith Fellowship as
    well as a travel grant from the University of Maryland College of
    Arts and Humanities.

[^2]: Grapheus and Scaliger, *La Tresadmirable, Tresmagnificque,
    Triumphante Entree, Du Treshault Trespuissant Prince Philipes*, 81;
    Bussels, *Spectacle, Rhetoric and Power*, 105–110.

[^3]: Bussels, *Spectacle, Rhetoric and Power*, 11–13.

[^4]: Bruaene, “Spectacle and Spin for a Spurned Prince.”

[^5]: Villiers and Vries, *La Ioyeuse [Et] Magnifique Entrée de
    Monseigneur Francoys*.

[^6]: Ibid., 32.

[^7]: Bruaene, “Spectacle and Spin for a Spurned Prince,” 270–271.

[^8]: Kaufmann, *The Mastery of Nature*, 136.

[^9]: Ibid., 140–141.

[^10]: On this [painted] board is superimposed a single independent
    board, on which Europe is represented, and which is designed so that
    she can bend her head and knees in a decent and civil motion with
    the rest of her body…(translations by author unless otherwise noted)
    “Huic tabulae applicata est et superposita, alia singularis et
    libera tabula, in qua Europa repraesentatur, ea ita conformata est,
    ut et caput et genua cum decenti et ciuili motu totuis corporis
    flectere possit, atque hac reuerentia, honorifico gestu, ter
    exhibito, saluauit ut excepti accedentem Inuictissimum Imperatorem
    Rudolphum II.” Fol. 19v from the “Description of the Ceremonial
    Entry of Emperor Rudolf II into Vienna, 17 July 1577, and of the
    Ehrenpforte erected by the City of Vienna, submitted to the City
    Council by Dr. Paulus Fabritius, Imperial Physician and Court
    Mathematicus.” (Niederösterreichisches Landesarchiv, Stände Archiv,
    A 9/26, fol. 10r-21r), published in Ibid., 215–216.

[^11]: On the opposite side Austria is pictured in the guise of a
    graceful and elegant girl, dressed in red and white, and which is
    set up to bow reverentially to his Imperial Majesty. “Ex altero
    latere picta est Austria, forma puella venustae ac lepidae, ornata
    veste rubra et alba, ea genibus flexis statuta est ut reuerenter
    Imperatoriae Maiestati honorem verecunda gestum exhibere uideatur.”
    Ibid., 216.

[^12]: Bedini, “The Role of Automata in the History of Technology”;
    Kang, “Wonders of Mathematical Magic”; Marr, “Understanding Automata
    in the Late Renaissance.”

[^13]: Hughes, *Regiomontanus*, 17; Zinner, *Regiomontanus*, 135.

[^14]: Burke, “Meaning and Crisis in the Early Sixteenth Century,” 80.

[^15]: Ibid., 82.

[^16]: For an innovative reconstruction of the mechanical lion as a
    programmable automaton, see Rosheim, *Leonardo’s Lost Robots*, chap.
    2.

[^17]: Kaufmann, *The Mastery of Nature*, 147.

[^18]: Tesauro, *Il Cannocchiale Aristotelico*, 59; Hanafi, *The Monster
    in the Machine*, 76, 191–192.

[^19]: Marin, “Notes on a Semiotic Approach to Parade, Cortege, and
    Procession,” 223.

[^20]: Findlen, “Cabinets, Collecting and Natural Philosophy,” 209–19;
    Daston and Park, *Wonders and the Order of Nature*, 280.

[^21]: Nichols, “The "Pen Works" of Hendrick Goltzius.”

[^22]: Hendrix and Vignau-Wilberg, *"Mira Calligraphiae Monumenta"*.

[^23]: On the significance of *pietre dure*, see Koeppe, *Art of the
    Royal Court*, 2940, 55–70.

[^24]: Daston and Park, *Wonders and the Order of Nature*, 281–286.

[^25]: Video of this piece in action can be seen here:
    <https://www.youtube.com/watch?list=UU4n0woAs2nZXNCTY-Dlo1hw&v=14y_7yNEnG8>

[^26]: “Ein weiblin von metall, welches mit zwo metalline spangen all
    indiana musicirt und dieselben aneinander schlegt.”; Bauer and
    Haupt, “Das Kunstkammerinventar Kaiser Rudolphs II: 1607-1611,” n.
    1965; Bredekamp, *The Lure of Antiquity and the Cult of the
    Machine*, 48.

[^27]: A number of extant eighteenth-century mechanical pictures now in
    the Conservatoire des Arts et Métiers in Paris are likely
    descendants of these objects; Chapuis and Droz, *Automata*, chap. 7.

[^28]: This paper was presented at the 2014 meeting of the Renaissance
    Society of America in New York. It is based on a spring 2013
    graduate seminar led by Anthony Colantuono, whose comments were
    invaluable. I am thankful for the support of the Smith Fellowship as
    well as a travel grant from the University of Maryland College of
    Arts and Humanities.

[^29]: Grapheus and Scaliger, *La Tresadmirable, Tresmagnificque,
    Triumphante Entree, Du Treshault Trespuissant Prince Philipes*, 81;
    Bussels, *Spectacle, Rhetoric and Power*, 105–110.

[^30]: Bussels, *Spectacle, Rhetoric and Power*, 11–13.

[^31]: Bruaene, “Spectacle and Spin for a Spurned Prince.”

[^32]: Villiers and Vries, *La Ioyeuse [Et] Magnifique Entrée de
    Monseigneur Francoys*.

[^33]: Ibid., 32.

[^34]: Bruaene, “Spectacle and Spin for a Spurned Prince,” 270–271.

[^35]: Kaufmann, *The Mastery of Nature*, 136.

[^36]: Ibid., 140–141.

[^37]: On this [painted] board is superimposed a single independent
    board, on which Europe is represented, and which is designed so that
    she can bend her head and knees in a decent and civil motion with
    the rest of her body…(translations by author unless otherwise noted)
    “Huic tabulae applicata est et superposita, alia singularis et
    libera tabula, in qua Europa repraesentatur, ea ita conformata est,
    ut et caput et genua cum decenti et ciuili motu totuis corporis
    flectere possit, atque hac reuerentia, honorifico gestu, ter
    exhibito, saluauit ut excepti accedentem Inuictissimum Imperatorem
    Rudolphum II.” Fol. 19v from the “Description of the Ceremonial
    Entry of Emperor Rudolf II into Vienna, 17 July 1577, and of the
    Ehrenpforte erected by the City of Vienna, submitted to the City
    Council by Dr. Paulus Fabritius, Imperial Physician and Court
    Mathematicus.” (Niederösterreichisches Landesarchiv, Stände Archiv,
    A 9/26, fol. 10r-21r), published in Ibid., 215–216.

[^38]: On the opposite side Austria is pictured in the guise of a
    graceful and elegant girl, dressed in red and white, and which is
    set up to bow reverentially to his Imperial Majesty. “Ex altero
    latere picta est Austria, forma puella venustae ac lepidae, ornata
    veste rubra et alba, ea genibus flexis statuta est ut reuerenter
    Imperatoriae Maiestati honorem verecunda gestum exhibere uideatur.”
    Ibid., 216.

[^39]: Bedini, “The Role of Automata in the History of Technology”;
    Kang, “Wonders of Mathematical Magic”; Marr, “Understanding Automata
    in the Late Renaissance.”

[^40]: Hughes, *Regiomontanus*, 17; Zinner, *Regiomontanus*, 135.

[^41]: Burke, “Meaning and Crisis in the Early Sixteenth Century,” 80.

[^42]: Ibid., 82.

[^43]: For an innovative reconstruction of the mechanical lion as a
    programmable automaton, see Rosheim, *Leonardo’s Lost Robots*, chap.
    2.

[^44]: Kaufmann, *The Mastery of Nature*, 147.

[^45]: Tesauro, *Il Cannocchiale Aristotelico*, 59; Hanafi, *The Monster
    in the Machine*, 76, 191–192.

[^46]: Marin, “Notes on a Semiotic Approach to Parade, Cortege, and
    Procession,” 223.

[^47]: Findlen, “Cabinets, Collecting and Natural Philosophy,” 209–19;
    Daston and Park, *Wonders and the Order of Nature*, 280.

[^48]: Nichols, “The”Pen Works" of Hendrick Goltzius.”

[^49]: Hendrix and Vignau-Wilberg, *“Mira Calligraphiae Monumenta”*.

[^50]: On the significance of *pietre dure*, see Koeppe, *Art of the
    Royal Court*, 2940, 55–70.

[^51]: Daston and Park, *Wonders and the Order of Nature*, 281–286.

[^52]: Video of this piece in action can be seen here:
    <https://www.youtube.com/watch?list=UU4n0woAs2nZXNCTY-Dlo1hw&v=14y_7yNEnG8>

[^53]: “Ein weiblin von metall, welches mit zwo metalline spangen all
    indiana musicirt und dieselben aneinander schlegt.”; Bauer and
    Haupt, “Das Kunstkammerinventar Kaiser Rudolphs II: 1607-1611,” n.
    1965; Bredekamp, *The Lure of Antiquity and the Cult of the
    Machine*, 48.

[^54]: A number of extant eighteenth-century mechanical pictures now in
    the Conservatoire des Arts et Métiers in Paris are likely
    descendants of these objects; Chapuis and Droz, *Automata*, chap. 7.
